[Music]
okay how are you guys doing good yeah
all right so let's see if this is gonna
work
hi thank you to the gray area organizers
and everyone for coming to my talk today
sometimes I feel like talking about our
work can be a bit tricky I don't know if
you guys feel the same way however here
at events like gray area festival I feel
like we have this camaraderie of
Investigation which in turn creates a
common language that makes it easier to
sort of share their work and talk about
it so it's a huge honor to be here today
and and I've been looking forward to it
a lot I've been fascinated by spaces
like this because to me they represent
invention it means that whether you're
an artist developer designer engineer or
startup this is a shared space of people
that are inventing a practice a model
and an idea and that you're here means
you're a part of a community that
supports that my name is sue Kwon I'd
like to tell you a few stories today and
share some inspirations but I warn you
that linearity is really not my strong
suit at all so maybe you can tell that
already but we're in this together
hopefully it remains on course so I was
recently following the story about Lisa
doll the top-ranking go player in the
world
Lisa doll this brave human faced off
with alphago a computer program in five
historic matches it was completely
riveting I don't a personal note my
family plays go and kind of have
understood the intricacy of the game a
little bit and it really struck me
always as a complex and intuitive game
and process so for the uninitiated the
game YK or go as it's been appropriated
is an abstract strategy board game for
two players it's
ancient and originated in China over
2,500 years ago so at least it all is
facing off with alphago and spoiler
alert
Lisa dole lost four to one and not good
odds I don't think I was alone and being
a bit uncomfortable to read that the
development comes 10 times sooner than
most AI researchers predicted but here's
the twist the top go players in the
world
Lisa doll included have said that they
see the game entirely differently now
after five months of playing with this
with the system they see the moves
they've never seen before and because of
how the system learns from its human
players it functions as a kind of
intelligent behavioral mirror that
learns alongside who it's playing and I
apologize to all the machine learning
researchers in the room for my crude
explanation I particularly liked this
article by Wired writer Kate Mets who
wrote that this event signaled a certain
cultural shift that these exercises are
no longer demonstrating this idea of
human versus machine but human and
machine it's not human versus machine
it's human and machine I thought that
was a pretty concise way of articulating
this rare point in history were all in
it was really evocative and it captured
the potential inspiration and anxiety
that might flow from that particular
dichotomy human and machine which is
fascinating for me because for years
I've been exploring on a level of
self-directed creative practice the
tensions trials and tribulations between
what I've been calling the mark made by
hand and the mark made by machine so
today I'd like to share some projects
that explore those two themes and rant
before I get ahead of myself human
versus machine human and machine is
definitely a framing it's a narrative
construct and its really epic I think as
a narrative it produces that sensation
that we feel when we look at images of
space for instance it makes us as humans
as a species feel really small and
insignificant and by extension our
issues and petty concerns and
are insignificant so I think there's a
real liberation there the exercise of
thinking about human output for me
attains this level of clarity that I
find really inspiring and I think that
clarity can be really collectivizing and
unifies in our unifying that's end rant
so as humans we make we sing we dance we
draw I should never sing but I draw our
ancestors drew as one of the earliest
expressions of art and recorded history
I draw it's been an obsession of mine
for some time I never know what I'm
going to draw but I know good or bad I
just need to do it to borrow from the
Fluxus manifesto for a moment for me the
output of a drawing is pretty immaterial
compared to the inhabitants of the state
of drawing it's really about being in
this flow state so I was curious in the
beginning of my career how to explore
how software can augment or
recontextualize or you know subvert
these creative processes these flow
States that obsession led me to the
Museum of Contemporary Art in Geneva
kind of really randomly actually I'd
been making these small dry sculptures
in my studio to play around with form
and light and really they're really
simple straightforward material
fixations then suddenly the curator got
in touch and I found myself carrying 30
hand-cut large scale drawings 20 hand
soldered LED lights and a suitcase full
of metal supports on an airport in an
airport from New York to London to
Geneva for my first installation I'm not
sure how they let me on the plane but it
was pretty it was pretty epic so I
arrived in Geneva and kind of harried
and wild and got to work at that point I
was a team of one meticulously crafting
the space this installation that
combined layers of light with paper
sculpture and sound in this massive room
I went from the frame of a drawing to
the frame of the screen and then back
into this physical space without
perimeter
in Karis guru the viewer could escape
into the surreal world of organic and
textural form completely created from
imagination so with this piece I knew I
wanted to create an organic line light
and sound spectacle that enveloped you I
knew that but what I didn't know it was
this with that is that it would be this
strange aha moment for me when you have
these tools and materials coming
together to change the scope of what you
thought would be possible on opening on
opening night I decided not to step into
the drawing and finish the line work in
the space as the animation billowed
around me not because it wasn't finished
but I wanted to introduce the notion of
an incompleteness into the territory of
the installation when drawing in in this
installation the power and potency of
gesture became very apparent and I was
became really curious about creating a
new environment in which performed
gesture controlled everything in a
site-specific space so next came this
project called ectis actus is a piece
experimenting with the potential of
performing architecture so in this 20
minute piece a performer myself plays
and improvises lines of violin from
which visual line work flows a simple
pluck of the string as an effector a
tensile vibrato manipulating the light
casting on this large-scale structure at
the time I've been reading a little bit
of Andy Clark's writings on cognitive
extension through gesture and I wanted
to channel that spontaneous energy
through a violin performance onto this
kind of massive space
using the stylus and the violin as a
tool and performance dramatically
changed my perspective towards software
in particular towards interface and
established design patterns one of my
favorite things about being at these
conferences is getting to know these
little stories about how people find
their inspiration and this is one of
mine so I came across this quote from a
British curator and my Dexter as the
pencil moves about the paper its path is
local and confined freed from the need
to consider the totality it can respond
immediately to where the hand is now in
presenta that quote really got stuck in
my head like a song I can't unhear what
if using our digital tools could feel as
natural and as end as uninhibited as
drawing freed from the need to consider
the totality the user flow something
less directed something more meditative
so that impulse led me to this project
called presenter presenter is a simple
drawing tool that in that enables anyone
to create 3d printable sculptures shaped
entirely by instinctive gesture digital
sculpture as simple as drawing in
collaboration with this guy named mr.
Duke the tool aims to capture the
meditative aspect of drawing and gesture
that's often stifled in many digital
tools and I was hoping with this project
I mean you read a lot about the
revolution of 3d printing and whatnot
but you realize that it's really for a
limited subset of people who understand
how to use the software I wanted to open
it up to everyone of all ages like kind
of all backgrounds so if you can pick up
a stylus you can make sculpture in this
tool
and and perhaps it's because I don't
have a lot of a name talent with code
software or hardware but a background
and interest in interface and new media
and its effects that I spent a long time
with this perspective of you know the
human gesture being the intuitive one
and the mechanical interface being
somehow like a sort of this other if
that makes any sense
so with that perspective that conflict
between human and machine marks was
really kind of at the forefront of my
brain quite broadly human and machines
represented concepts at polar ends of a
spectrum so I was reading up into the
atom illogical origins of computer and
it's generally just a computational
system that produces automation but to
bring you back to my buddy Lisa Dahl and
alphago perhaps what we can learn from
these stories is that the advances in in
AI are creating a shift between that
apparent dichotomy when I think of
artificial intelligence and the computer
today and strides in deep learning a
machine learning I think of the Chinese
translation for the computer which is
Dean Lowe it translates directly to
electric brain in 1964 philip k dick
asked if androids dreamt of Electric
Sheep now in 2016 we might actually get
to find out in art school I remember
encountering the works of German
minimalist artist Sol LeWitt he's
usually a crowd favorite his most famous
pieces are operational diagrams on a
wall surface any continuous stretch of
wall using a hard pencil place 50 points
at random the points should be eaten
evenly distributed over the area of the
wall and all the points should be
connected by straight lines instructions
for others to execute
I always thought in this procedural
nature it reminded me a bit of lines of
code the work fall is a very
computational language eliminating the
soften expression
humans in an artwork so that brings us
to today today I'd like to talk to you
about my latest project drawing
operations unit generation 1 today I'd
like to talk to you about Doug so
drawing operations is an improvisational
dry and collaboration between me and a
robotic arm who I'm named duck I've
worked with some pretty eccentric
characters but Doug is by far my
strangest collaborator to date together
we started out in New York and went to
Austin and most recently got back from
Japan doing these performances I was
really I was really nervous but he did
great he kept his servos cool he didn't
break a sweat
that's my robot joke for drawing
operations I want to flip Sol LeWitt's
original script on its head a little bit
instead of humans following mechanical
operations I want to try something
different
I wanted to experiment with machines
following human drawing operations its
initial foray it's an initial foray into
engaging a machine as an artistic
collaborator and also way to participate
in the narrative around machine learning
within the space of a creative practice
I remember the first time I saw a weird
prototyping I saw Doug like coming to
life it was really amazing it was like
seeing a kid take its first steps and
equally awkward so along with my friend
yotan we started designing the behavior
of this strange new collaborator first
we needed to get it to move we uploaded
noise patterns into its Arduino brain
and let it work its magic secondly we
needed to get Doug to see with the use
of a simple web camera and a few cables
and the computer the robot tracks my
movement the movement of my mark via
color tracking seeing-eye dog was in the
building
thirdly we programmed the robot to
follow by using computer vision library
called JIT in Maxum SP the robot can
recognize the motion of my line and
mimic the gesture in real
I'm on the paper as we draw together
these are some of the drawings we've
started making and the project for me is
beyond it being a bit strange it's an
experiment in gestural empathy a
performance of following the leader
follow the leader between human and
machine and in the introduction of an
intuitive language of gesture to to a
machine to Doug with the aim of showing
artistic co-creation not human versus
machine but in generation one human and
machine drawing together in generation
two which I'm really excited about I'm
exploring the space of shared memory
not only will Doug be able to remember
the drawing gestures we've done together
in the studio and in performance I'll be
collecting the drawing styles of other
people by collecting these styles of
artists and non artists and everybody
will be in effect building a brain of
drawing behaviors unique to this robotic
arm and unique to Doug but available to
all generation too will be fully open
source and it won't just be me on stage
learning how to draw with Doug but
disseminating his robotic brain and
design for everyone else to play with so
I found this pretty surprising and in
many of my other projects perfection was
always the goal like trying to find the
perfect line or form and the perfect
interaction but the surprising thing
about this is when when I've been doing
this project the inaccuracy has really
become part of the improvisation it's
definitely not a bug it's a feature I'll
leave you with this wait no let's just
let's just think about that for a second
it's yes okay I'll leave you with this
you can thank Rachel Fink's for that one
oh by the way uh moves the Alpha go make
are described by Lee as beautiful and in
the games he's playing you can see the
astonishment on his face but I think
that's just the beginning
generation Doug generation one Doug can
move see and follow in forthcoming
generations Doug will be able to
remember recall and reflect drawings
with me and hopefully drawings with all
of you when that happens I have no idea
what he'll draw like but I'm pretty
curious to find out thanks
[Applause]